MELIUS DE AMICITIA , [all—³⁸7 ¹

honoria, ln the technical Latin sense of ‘public office’

commta quibusque, rer 1³. The unusual plural is required
here, sor ln each case there are two friends.

, ex quo . . . exstitisse: this construction can only occur in .

the relative sentence, when the relative is a mere connexion

{pl ecrpaepgeand the sentence can be therefore treated asa prin·
p .

35. plerumque rusca, ‘in most cases justified,’ manifestly on the ³

part of theman who refuses to render the wrong service.
quidvis. . . postulare, notice the meaning of quidvis [esp.

as compared with aliquid above]: ‘to make¹ arry demand :¹ ι

ale. to stick at nothing.

Haeo-videri. ‘These‚ he said, were the fatalities, so to
speak [quast apologizing for the metaphorical satu, see 291,

which threatened friendship, so numerous, that he said he =

thought it hest to avoid them all, in the interest not merely

of wisdom, but even of happiness! The diceret aridai is a ,
(natural but unnecessary) expansior of videretur, illustrating ,

in a milder way the construction above, see 27.

36. numne, rare (but good Latin), for nunt.

Coriolanus, the famous Cn. Marcius, sumamed Coriolanus from
Corioli the Volscian town which he conqueredr and who
afterwards, indignant against his ungrateful country from
which he had been expelled, leda Volscian army against it,
andhwas only dissuaded from his purpose by his wife and
mot er.

Thce cipp is well known to English readers from Shakespeare's
ono anus. -

vacellinus, sumame of Sp. Cassius, see 20.
nunus, ree28.

3⁷. Tiberius sempronius Gracchus, tribune of the plebs, 133 ¹

lae„ feeling deeply the agrarian distress. owing to the' growth

ι of large estates and slave-culture, while the small farmer-
class were dying out, proposed land-laws to remedy this 3 but
was violently opposed by the aristocracy, and though his law
was carried, anot was raised at the summer electioris (133),
and he was killed. Cicero, when he says rempublicam vex-
antem, is speaking as a member of the senatorial or aristo·
cratic party, to whom the popular leaders were odious.

Q. Aelius labenda Stoic and a man of talem, nephew of
Africanus the younger, but a bitter opponent of Tiberius
Gracchus, and ten years later (when he was praetor) also os
his younger brother C. Gracchus. See Introd. Segarbnrk circle.

0. Blossius, of Cumae (in Campania), a philosopher, a friend

erf Ti. Gracchus, who after Gracchus‘ death (133 aa.) was

 

